# Analysis of missing genes

We downloaded the phastCons genomic track for the alignment of 59 genomes to Mus, mm10.60way.phastCons.bw, from UCSC and converted this to a tabix-indexed bedgraph file, as we have described in the methods section of our paper. Given this bedgraph file, a list of Mus Ensembl gene ids, and a bed file of intervals for functional elements for each annotated gene (see Mus_musculus.GRCm38.83_GeneAndAnnotatedSeqs.bed.gz), we generated a table of gene-level phastCons scores with ExtractGeneLevelPhasconsScore.py. Note, Mus_musculus.GRCm38.83_GeneAndAnnotatedSeqs.bed.gz must be unzipped before using with the current version of this script. The bedgraph file of phastCons scores is available from the authors upon request. This script generated a tab-separated output file (see Mus_EnsGene_PhastconsScores.tsv). Note, for genes with no conservation score, this table indicates a score of -9. In downstream analyses for plotting distributions by missingness category, we convert these to zeroes, under the assumption that non multi-way alignment is equivalent to minimal, if any, conservation across species.  

We then supply the phastCons score table and the gene-level coverage table produced by OmnibusAssemblyCoverageAnalysis.py to ParseGeneCoverageToMissingByPhastcons.py. Genes with coverage of zero are classified as missing from the assembly. After running this pipeline for each assembler (Trinity, Shannon, and BinPacker, we then generated a multi-assembler summary that is parsed in plotting missingness frequency, and phastCons score for side-by-side comparisons among assemblers. 
